---
layout: post
title: "Role of Women in Armed Forces"
author: jane 
date: 08-03-2021 11:14:55 +05:30 
categories: [ HEALTH ] 
image: assets/images/08-03-2021/logo.jpg
---
Humanity has traversed through thousands of years and have evolved and grown into a close knit society where we all have an important role to play. History is replete with stories of great human figures that got catapulted to heroic statures and some have even attained God like status. But all these humans share a common thread. Almost all of them were males. We hardly see any female figures except for a few who could make inroads into the patriarchalism that prevails all over the world. Women have always been identified as playing second fiddle to men. Their role had always been restricted to bearing kids, looking after household affairs and obviously attending dotingly to her father and later to her husband. Except for a few societies, the girl child is always kept at second slot when compared to her male siblings who are better fed, groomed and always get the best of the available resources.

But the last century has seen a lot of changes and more so the last two decades. There has been a surge in women taking up responsibilities and assuming an active role in fields which were considered to be traditional forte of men. Time has moved especially in favor of the fairer sex. Thanks to the educational system, developing infrastructure, technological developments and obviously the opening up of the economies.

Interestingly women have been dominating the educational, health, hospitality, telecommunication, IT and ITES sectors but recently they are slowly but steadily moving in so called masculine domain that is armed forces. Traditionally people felt uncomfortable even with the mention of the women fighting with the arms. It was felt that only men are fit to be in combats and women were seen as anomalies. But this has been proved as an archaic thought.

Now women have started asserting themselves. They feel that all opportunities should be open to both men and women and they have proved their worth in every field. The recent decision of The Supreme Court regarding grant of permanent commission to women officers in armed forces will go a long way in changing the perceived gender bias against women. Women had their first induction in British Indian Army in 1927 as Military Nursing officers and as medical officers in 1943 to look after the troops, families and public during deployments which included female section of the population.

It was only in the year 1992 that the Army, Air Force and Navy began inducting women as Short Service Commission (SSC) officers. This was the first time women were allowed to join the military outside the medical stream and as of now there are more than 9500 women in military. Now they have created a place for themselves as fighter pilots in IAF and as administrators in supporting services. Women are also included in combat roles in five paramilitary forces, called the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs). They are allowing women entry from the rank of constable to direct entry officers. Now women are representing more than five percent of these forces. The government has plans that women would account for thirty three percent representation in CRPF and CISF and fifteen percent in the BSF, SSB and ITBP in coming days.

IN Armed Forces, women have come a long way and have matched pace with the time. But there is so much still to be done. The armed forces have to be accommodative in assimilating the women power in all wings whether it be combat, administration or medical. It is the responsibility of both the government and the society at large to recognize the women power and let them achieve their full potential. We need to work upon a roadmap that entails societal changes, acceptance and inclusiveness of women in all spheres of life.

The writer is a senior Border Security Force Officer and the views expressed in the article are his own.