---
layout: post
title: "Cryptocurrency VeChain Decreases More Than 4% Within 24 hours"
author: jane 
date: 15-01-2022 14:47:22 +05:30 
categories: [ CRYPTOCURRENCY ] 
image: assets/images/15-01-2022/crypto_movers_image_99.png
---
Over the past 24 hours, VeChain’s (CRYPTO: VET) price has fallen 4.97% to $0.08. This continues its negative trend over the past week where it has experienced a 4.0% loss, moving from $0.08 to its current price.

The chart below compares the price movement and volatility for VeChain over the past 24 hours (left) to its price movement over the past week (right). The gray bands are bollinger bands, measuring the volatility for both the daily and weekly price movements. The wider the bands are, or the larger the gray area is at any given moment, the larger the volatility.

The trading volume for the coin has tumbled 20.0% over the past week while the circulating supply of the coin has risen 1.13%. This brings the circulating supply to 66.76 billion. According to our data, the current market cap ranking for VET is #35 at 5.18 billion.

Where Can You Buy VeChain?

If you are interested in purchasing VeChain and want to know the best cryptocurrency exchanges, follow this link to Benzinga Money.

Do you want to learn more about trading and be able to analyze your own portfolio of stocks or cryptocurrencies? Consider signing up for Benzinga Pro. Benzinga Pro gives you up-to-date news and analytics to empower your investing and trading strategy. You can follow the link here to visit.

Powered by CoinGecko API

This post contains affiliate links from which Benzinga may earn a commission.

This article was generated by Benzinga’s automated content engine and reviewed by an editor.