---
layout: post
title: "Cryptocurrency FTX Token Rises More Than 4% In 24 hours"
author: jane 
date: 15-01-2022 14:47:23 +05:30 
categories: [ CRYPTOCURRENCY ] 
image: assets/images/15-01-2022/crypto_movers_image_98.png
---
Over the past 24 hours, FTX Token’s (CRYPTO: FTT) price rose 4.66% to $44.25. This continues its positive trend over the past week where it has experienced a 19.0% gain, moving from $36.27 to its current price. As it stands right now, the coin’s all-time high is $84.18.

The chart below compares the price movement and volatility for FTX Token over the past 24 hours (left) to its price movement over the past week (right). The gray bands are bollinger bands, measuring the volatility for both the daily and weekly price movements. The wider the bands are, or the larger the gray area is at any given moment, the larger the volatility.

The trading volume for the coin has tumbled 1.0% over the past week while the circulating supply of the coin has risen 0.8%. This brings the circulating supply to 138.57 million, which makes up an estimated 41.43% of its max supply of 334.44 million. According to our data, the current market cap ranking for FTT is #32 at 6.03 billion.

Where Can You Buy FTX Token?

If you are interested in purchasing FTX Token or want to learn more about it, follow this link to Benzinga Money. Our Benzinga Money team has in-depth educational content that not only explains the details of the coin itself but also how and where you can purchase it.

Do you want to learn more about trading and be able to analyze your own portfolio of stocks or cryptocurrencies? Consider signing up for Benzinga Pro. Benzinga Pro gives you up-to-date news and analytics to empower your investing and trading strategy. You can follow the link here to visit.

Powered by CoinGecko API

This post contains affiliate links from which Benzinga may earn a commission.

This article was generated by Benzinga’s automated content engine and reviewed by an editor.