---
layout: post
title: "Cryptocurrency Ethereum Classic's Price Increased More Than 5% Within 24 hours"
author: jane 
date: 15-01-2022 14:47:19 +05:30 
categories: [ CRYPTOCURRENCY ] 
image: assets/images/15-01-2022/crypto_movers_image_100.png
---
Over the past 24 hours, Ethereum Classic’s (CRYPTO: ETC) price rose 5.94% to $32.28. This continues its positive trend over the past week where it has experienced a 5.0% gain, moving from $30.62 to its current price. As it stands right now, the coin’s all-time high is $167.09.

The chart below compares the price movement and volatility for Ethereum Classic over the past 24 hours (left) to its price movement over the past week (right). The gray bands are bollinger bands, measuring the volatility for both the daily and weekly price movements. The wider the bands are, or the larger the gray area is at any given moment, the larger the volatility.

Ethereum Classic’s trading volume has climbed 15.0% over the past week along with the circulating supply of the coin, which has increased 0.16%. This brings the circulating supply to 132.29 million, which makes up an estimated 62.78% of its max supply of 210.70 million. According to our data, the current market cap ranking for ETC is #42 at 4.26 billion.

Where Can You Buy Ethereum Classic?

If you are interested in purchasing Ethereum Classic and want to know the best cryptocurrency exchanges, follow this link to Benzinga Money.

Do you want to learn more about trading and be able to analyze your own portfolio of stocks or cryptocurrencies? Consider signing up for Benzinga Pro. Benzinga Pro gives you up-to-date news and analytics to empower your investing and trading strategy. You can follow the link here to visit.

Powered by CoinGecko API

This post contains affiliate links from which Benzinga may earn a commission.

This article was generated by Benzinga’s automated content engine and reviewed by an editor.