---
layout: post
title: "Google TV vs Android TV: What’s new and different"
author: jane 
date: 22-12-2020 10:37:49 +05:30 
categories: [ TECHNOLOGY ] 
image: assets/images/22-12-2020/79833136.cms
---
After Android TV, there’s something new called Google TV. Now, to clear all doubts, Google TV is not another smart TV operating system Android TV is an operating system built by Google for smart TVs, media sticks, set-top-boxes and other devices. Android TV is not going anywhere. Google TV can be simply considered as a software extension. For example, consider Google TV as a software skin over Android like Samsung has its OneUI on top of Android OS or OnePlus offers Oxygen OS.What’s the need for Google TV? Google claims that Google TV UI aims to simplify your TV experience. For starters, whenever you decide to watch something, you get confused as to what to watch as you have limitless options.“...with more choices than ever, it can take a long time just to find something to watch. That’s why we made Google TV—a new entertainment experience designed to help you easily browse and discover what to watch,” explains Shalini Govilpai, senior director, Google TV in a blog post.The Google TV experience is available with the new Chromecast and is expected to be rolled out for devices.The Google TV UI aims to track your viewing choices across your apps and subscriptions and helps you find what you really desire to watch. It is not a separate content streaming platform.For example, if you want to watch a horror movie, just use voice to ask Google like “find horror movies” and Google TV will hunt down all horror movies across all the apps you have downloaded and the subscriptions you have. This will help you save time, as you will not have to individually open every streaming app and look out whether a particular movie that you wish to watch is included or not.Google TV works with apps like Disney+, france.tv, HBO Max, Netflix, Peacock, Rakuten Viki and YouTube, among others. It is expected more platforms will be included.As far as Android OS version is concerned, Android TV runs Android version 9 while Google TV is based on Android 10. So, unless your smart TV gets an Android 10 update, you wont get Google TV.The only device that supports Google TV is the new Chromecast with Google TV and it will take a couple of years for Google TV to get visibility. Google said that newer STBs, smart TVs that will be launched in 2021 may come with Google TV. By 2022, Google hopes to see all smart TVs using Google TV interface. However, the story may be a bit different for devices like Fire TV stick, Nvidia Shield TV and others. This is because Amazon and Nvidia may not want to adopt the Google TV interface.One of the key USPs of Google TV is the ability to add content to Watchlist from your phone , PC or other devices from Google search itself. There’s a new Google TV app that replaces Google Play Movies & TV app which organises your Watchlist and lets you even rent movies.