---
layout: post
title: "A 100 million year old meteorite crater found in Australia s gold mine"
author: jane 
date: 11-09-2020 11:13:25 
categories: [ SCIENCE ] 
image: assets/images/11-09-2020/78039345.jpg
---
This year, a lot of discoveries have been made. Recently, a huge 100 million-year-old meteorite crater was discovered in one of the gold mines in Western Australia. The company was drilling to find gold, but instead, discovered something more precious and historic. The impact crater is believed to have a 5 km diameter and this massive crater was not visible from the surface; it was found using electromagnetic surveys by the investigators.The crater was found in the town of Ora Banda, north-west of Kalgoorlie-Boulder, which is known for Goldfields mining. According to the experts, this crater is nearly five times bigger than the world-famous Wolfe Creek crater, which is in the Kimberley.The discovery of this yet-to-be-named crater has rocked the world of geophysicists and geologists. According to Dr. Jayson Meyers, a geologist and geophysicist, this discovery is quite unexpected and significant at the same time. The geologist said, “This discovery was made in an area where the landscape is very flat. You wouldn’t know it was there because the crater has been filled in over geological time.”Evolution Mining, Australia’s third largest gold-mining firm, found this crater while digging for gold. The crater’s diameter is 5 km, and therefore, it is believed to be the largest meteorite craters in the world.As per Dr. Meyers, the meteorite that formed this crater must be somewhere between 320 to 660 ft in diameter. He also said that new technologies have made things a lot easier for scientists to make these discoveries. According to him, there are probably more such craters waiting to be discovered.