---
layout: post
title: "iPhone users vs Android users: How much they spend on apps and more"
author: jane 
date: 08-01-2021 13:04:32 +05:30 
categories: [ TECHNOLOGY ] 
image: assets/images/08-01-2021/80143439.cms
---
The year 2020 has been an unprecedented one. Due to the pandemic, it has been one of the toughest year for nations across the world. For most businesses too it has been no different. However, there are also segments that have seen growth due to change in consumer behaviour forced by the pandemic. The mobile apps segment is case in point. It has seen record setting growth."2020 was a record-setting year for both mobile games and non-game apps, and consumer spending on Apple ’s App Store and Google Play soared to new heights as users turned to their mobile devices for education, employment, and entertainment. Consumers spent nearly $111 billion globally on in-app purchases, subscriptions, and premium apps across both marketplaces," as per preliminary data from Sensor Tower Store Intelligence. The number represents 30.2 percent year-over-year growth from 2019 when app stores generated $85.2 billion.However, there's one thing that didn't change, and remained as it has been for years -- Apple App Store dominance in consumer spending vs Google Play Store . Apple App Store generated 87.3% more revenue than Google Play Store. Wonder what Apple iPhone users spent on vs Android smartphone users? All this and more based on Senson Tower data.While the consumer spending saw a rise on both Apple’s App Store and Google Play Store, there was a massive difference in the amount that was spent between the two. Apple’s App Store generated 87.3% more in consumer spending than the Play store, claims the report.Consumer spending on the App Store reached $72.3 billion in 2020 and in the same period, it reached $38.6 billion for Google Play. While in 2019, the consumer spending on the App Store was recorded at $55.5 billion and Google Play Store’s spending stood at $29.7 billion.Both Apple App Store and Google Play Store experienced roughly the same year-over-year growth in 2020. The spending gap between the platforms remained relatively flat compared to 2019. The consumer spending on the App Store saw a 30.3% year-over-year growth and the consumer spending on the Google Play store increased by 30% year-over-year.The biggest contribution of revenue for Apple’s App Store was from apps from the gaming and entertainment category, according to the report. “Aside from games, entertainment category apps saw the most user spending on the App Store, growing 29.3% year-over-year to $5.3 billion,” added the report.When it comes to Android users , the highest-earning category turned out to be social, climbing 71.4% year-over-year to $1.2 billion last year from $700 million in 2019.Besides recording a new high in overall consumer spending, this year also witnessed a new record in first-time installs as the App Store and Google Play collectively reached nearly 143 billion, up 23.7% from approximately 115.5 billion in 2019.In the non-game app category, the maximum revenue was generated by TikTok — including Douyin on iOS in China — on the App Store in 2020. This app saw a growth of more than 600% year-over-year to $1.2 billion on that marketplace, as per the report. As for Google Play, Google One generated the most revenue last year, climbing 41.9% year-over-year to $444 million on Google Play in 2020.