---
layout: post
title: "China's Tianwen-1 probe captures stunning images of Mars | See Pictures"
author: jane 
date: 08-03-2021 11:13:52 +05:30 
categories: [ SCIENCE ] 
image: assets/images/08-03-2021/Mars__CNSA_-647x363.jpeg
---
Colour picture of Mars taken by China's Tianwen-1 probe (Picture Courtesy: China National Space Administration)

China's national space agency Sunday released stunning high-resolution images of Mars captured by its Tianwen-1 probe, which is currently orbiting the Red planet. Launched on July 23 of last year, Tianwen-1 has covered a distance of 475 million km over a period of 224 days.

China's Tianwen-1 probe, including an orbiter, a lander, and a rover, successfully entered the Mars orbit on February 24 after a nearly seven-month voyage from Earth.

The China National Space Administration (CNSA) on March 4 released a new set of images of the surface of Mars, including two panchromatic view and one colour image, captured by the probe.

Martian landforms such as small craters, mountain ridges and dunes are clearly visible in the images. It is estimated that the diameter of the largest impact crater in the images is around 620 meters, state-run Xinhua news agency reported quoting the CNSA, according to a PTI report.

Here are the images

"The two black-and-white 7-meter-resolution images were taken by the high-definition camera on Tianwen 1's orbiter when the probe was about 330 to 350 kilometers above the Martian surface," the CNSA said on its official website.

Black-and-white picture of Mars taken by China's Tianwen-1 probe (Picture Courtesy: China National Space Administration)

"Craters, mountain ridges and sand dunes on the red planet are clear on the pictures," added the CNSA.

Black-and-white picture of Mars taken by China's Tianwen-1 probe (Picture Courtesy: China National Space Administration)

"The color picture was generated by another camera on the orbiter, showing Mars' North Pole," said China's national space agency.

Colour picture of Mars taken by China's Tianwen-1 probe (Picture Courtesy: China National Space Administration)

China's Tianwen-1 probe

China launched Tianwen-1 on July 23, 2020 and entered the parking orbit around Mars on February 24 this year. Currently, it is about 212 million km away from Earth, according to CNSA.

The lander carrying the rover is expected to land on Mars in May or June of this year.

Chinese space engineers and scientists have chosen a relatively flat region in the southern part of Utopia Planitia, a large plain, as a potential landing zone.

The rover will be released after landing to conduct scientific exploration, the state-run Xinhua news agency reported.